The Project Gutenberg eBook of A visit to the Roman catacombs
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: A visit to the Roman catacombs


Author: James Spencer Northcote

Release date: October 21, 2023 [eBook #71927]

Language: English

Original publication: London: S. Anselms's Society, 1891

Credits: deaurider and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE ROMAN CATACOMBS ***





A VISIT TO THE ROMAN CATACOMBS.




                                 A VISIT
                                  TO THE
                             ROMAN CATACOMBS.

                                    BY
                     REV. J. SPENCER NORTHCOTE, D.D.
                          PROVOST OF BIRMINGHAM.

                       LONDON: S. ANSELM’S SOCIETY,
                      9 AGAR STREET, CHARING CROSS.
                                  1891.

                         [_All rights reserved._]




PREFACE.


My study of the Roman Catacombs began in 1846. Two years later I
published a series of letters upon the subject in the _Rambler_, and the
substance of these, with some additions and corrections, was collected
into a small volume in 1856. This was translated both into French and
German, and a second English edition was published in 1859.

But in 1864 and 1867 the first two volumes of De Rossi’s great work
appeared; and these not only added indefinitely to our knowledge of
particulars about the Catacombs, but also effected a complete revolution
in the view to be taken of their history, and laid a new basis for the
future study of them. Formerly, it had been taken for granted that the
Christians had had recourse to this mode of burying their dead, only for
the sake of the opportunities of secrecy which it afforded, and it was a
difficult question for Christian archæologists to solve how it had been
possible to carry on a work of such magnitude, under the very eyes (as it
were) of the Pagan authorities, without detection. De Rossi set aside
these speculations, and proved that there was no necessity for the early
Christians to take exceptional precautions with reference to the burial
of their dead, since many of the customs of their Pagan neighbours in
this matter were such as they might themselves make use of, and, under
ordinary circumstances, their cemeteries were adequately protected by the
law.

Henceforward, the manual of 1859 was not only incomplete, it had also
been demonstrated to be incorrect. In 1869, therefore, a much larger
volume was published by Rev. W. R. Brownlow and myself, founded upon the
new discoveries. This also was favourably received by the public; the
first English edition was soon exhausted, and translations were made both
in France and Germany. A second and enlarged edition is now in course of
preparation, which will embody the most interesting and important parts
of De Rossi’s third volume, which has only just appeared. Meanwhile,
however, there is need of a short manual, which shall be a safe guide to
those who only desire to become acquainted with the leading features of
the subject, according to the present condition of our knowledge of it;
and with this view I have compiled the following pages, at a time when
ill health has necessitated the suspension of more arduous labours. They
do not pretend to give a complete account either of the past history or
present condition of the Catacombs, but merely a correct outline of the
whole, so that those who would pursue the study further shall, at least,
have nothing to unlearn.

I have called the volume “A visit to the Roman Catacombs,” because it
describes the principal objects of interest which are to be seen in the
visit now usually paid by educated travellers to the Catacomb of St.
Callixtus. To this, however, I have prefixed half a dozen chapters, which
make, in fact, three-fourths of the whole work, and in which I have
condensed the information which every visitor ought to have before he
descends into these subterranean crypts. Unless he has some general idea
of what the Catacombs really are, how they came to be made, when and how
they were used, and what they contain, he will derive but little pleasure
or profit from what he sees in them. I hope, therefore, that this volume
will not only be a valuable guide to those who are able to visit the
Catacombs, but also a useful introduction to the whole subject for all
classes. Those who desire to study it more profoundly must have recourse
to De Rossi’s learned volumes, or to the English abridgment of them.

ST. DOMINIC’S, STONE, _September 1877_.

_P.S._—Any profits derived from the sale of this book will be sent to
Commendatore de Rossi to promote the work of excavation, which languishes
for want of funds. At more than one spot in the Catacombs, the Commission
of Sacred Archæology, of which De Rossi is Secretary, has the strongest
reason for believing in the existence of historic monuments of great
value, and it is most desirable that these monuments should be recovered,
whilst we have amongst us so competent an interpreter of them. But
funds are wanting. The late Monsignor de Merode was a most munificent
benefactor to this work, and his death has been an irreparable loss.
Smaller contributions, however, will be thankfully received; and through
the kindness of friends, or by means of my own public lectures, I have
been able to send two or three hundred pounds within the last few years.
Any further sums that may be intrusted to me for the same purpose will be
at once forwarded to Rome.

                                                                  J. S. N.




