The Project Gutenberg eBook of The World Court (Vol. I, No. 2, Sept. 1915)
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The World Court (Vol. I, No. 2, Sept. 1915)


Author: Various

Release date: October 17, 2023 [eBook #71895]

Language: English

Original publication: New York City: International Peace Forum, 1915

Credits: Richard Tonsing, hekula03, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from images made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WORLD COURT (VOL. I, NO. 2, SEPT. 1915) ***

[Illustration: Sept. 1915 10 Cents The WORLD COURT Vol. 1 No. 2 The
World Court Movement by Hon. Theodore Marburg]




                              _The_
                                PENALTY OF
                                LEADERSHIP


In every field of human endeavor, he that is first must perpetually live
in the white light of publicity. ¶Whether the leadership be vested in a
man or in a manufactured product, emulation and envy are ever at work.
¶In art, in literature, in music, in industry, the reward and the
punishment are always the same. ¶The reward is widespread recognition;
the punishment, fierce denial and detraction. ¶When a man’s work becomes
a standard for the whole world, it also becomes a target for the shafts
of the envious few. ¶If his work be merely mediocre, he will be left
severely alone—if he achieve a masterpiece, it will set a million
tongues a wagging. ¶Jealousy does not protrude its forked tongue at the
artist who produces a commonplace painting. ¶Whatsoever you write, or
paint, or play, or sing, or build, no one will strive to surpass or to
slander you, unless your work be stamped with the seal of genius. ¶Long,
long, after a great work, or a good work has been done, those who are
disappointed or envious, continue to cry out that it can not be done.
¶Spiteful little voices in the domain of art were raised against our own
Whistler as a mountebank, long after the big world had acclaimed him its
greatest artistic genius. ¶Multitudes flocked to Bayreuth to worship at
the musical shrine of Wagner, while the little group of those whom he
had dethroned and displaced, argued angrily that he was no musician at
all. ¶The little world continued to protest that Fulton could never
build a steamboat, while the big world flocked to the river banks to see
his boat steam by. ¶The leader is assailed because he is a leader, and
the effort to equal him is merely added proof of that leadership.
¶Failing to equal or to excel, the follower seeks to depreciate and to
destroy—but only confirms once more the superiority of that which he
strives to supplant. ¶There is nothing new in this. ¶It is as old as the
world and as old as the human passions—envy, fear, greed, ambition, and
the desire to surpass. ¶And it all avails nothing. ¶If the leader truly
leads, he remains—the leader. ¶Master-poet, master-painter,
master-workman, each in his turn is assailed, and each holds his laurels
through the ages. ¶That which is good or great makes itself known, no
matter how loud the clamor of denial. ¶That which deserves to
live—lives.


                _Copyright 1914, Cadillac Motor Car Co._




                             The World Court


 ═══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════
                   TABLE OF CONTENTS, SEPTEMBER, 1915
 ═══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════
 WORLD COMMENT                                                        59
   THE UNITED STATES NOT A “TENDERFOOT”
   MUTUAL OBLIGATION
   GERMANY’S MATERIAL ADVANTAGE
   A SLANDER OF BRAVE MEN
   THOMAS A. EDISON DRAFTED
   DR. DILLON ON THE FIRST PHASE OF THE WAR
   A KINDLY VOICE FROM GERMANY
   WAR—BUT NOT FAMINE
   STRIKES IN WAR TIMES
   AN INTERESTING FORECAST
   PRESIDENT WILSON’S LAST GERMAN NOTE
   “PEACE BY COMPULSION”
   THE RED SEA, BY FRANCIS BOWLER PRATT

 EDITORIALS                                                           67
   THE LAW OF NATIONS
   THE WAR PATH OR THE WORLD STATE
   CHINA AND JAPAN
   ACTION VERSUS WORDS
   ENGLAND AND THE DISINHERITED
   THE UNCERTAINTY OF FUTURE EVENTS
   THE DUTY OF THE HOUR
   THE ARISTOCRACY OF LABOR

 THE WORLD COURT MOVEMENT                 _By Hon. Theodore Marburg_  73
 THE WAR’S POSSIBLE DURATION                     _By George K. Shaw_  79
 THE COMPOSITION OF THE WORLD COURT            _By Emerson McMillin_  81
 THE MINIMUM NUMBER                           _By Harry A. Garfield_  83
 THE BREAKDOWN OF “CULTURE” AS A
   REDEMPTIVE FORCE                                                   86
 THE CHURCH AS A FACTOR IN RACIAL         _By Rev. Sidney L. Gulick_
   RELATIONS                                                          88
 POSSIBILITIES AND LIMITATIONS OF A WORLD _By William Dudley Foulke_
   COURT                                                              90
 THE BUSINESS MAN IN POLITICS                 _By John Hays Hammond_  94
 PEACE BY COMPULSION                          _By James Brown Scott_  97
 THE MILITARIST                               _By John Edward Oster_  98
 A PEACE SUGGESTION                                                  100
 THE INFORMATION DESK                                                103




                              Announcement


The work of creating sentiment favorable to the establishment of a World
Court to judicially settle international disputes, now being undertaken
by the International Peace Forum, including the publication of the
“World Court,” involves considerable expense. New subscriptions to the
“World Court,” in addition to increasing its value and enlarging its
influence, will materially help out financially.

To-day, more than ever before, the voice of the people is for the
abolition of war. To this end plans are being formed and promulgated.
The contributions from the pens of able and influential writers in the
“World Court” will keep its readers in close touch with the work.

